docs: document per-compartment block-builders (#16131)
grafana/mimir: docs/internal/compartments/read-compartments.md

consumption resource usage stays independent of the number of write compartments instead of growing
with it.

### Ordering records across write compartments

A component that consumes the same partition from every write compartment's Kafka cluster sees each
cluster's stream independently, with no inherent ordering between them. Appending one cluster's records
and then the next's could produce out-of-order samples if the clusters' records overlap in time, since
the second cluster's timestamps then rewind to earlier in the window. To reduce this, the per-cluster
streams can be merged into a single stream ordered by Kafka record timestamp before being consumed.

- **Ingesters** can optionally merge on the live path. A live stream is unbounded, so the merge is

>   best-effort within a bounded window.

Reviewer: question: what happens if a window closes and data arrives late?

Author: It's still ingested (unless the sample timestamps are very old), but samples might end up as [out of order](https://grafana.com/blog/new-in-grafana-mimir-introducing-out-of-order-sample-ingestion/), with samples for the same series but later timestamps already ingested. Out of order samples are still written and queryable. However, they are less resource efficient compared to in-order samples, so that's why we try to minimise the chances of ingesting out of order samples if we can.

compartment's ingesters: it narrows a query to the compartments that can hold the selected metric
names and fans out otherwise (see [Querying read compartments](#querying-read-compartments)).

## Block-builders

Each read compartment runs its own block-builder scheduler and pool of block-builders. The scheduler
monitors the compartment's topic across every write compartment's Kafka cluster and cuts jobs; the
block-builders consume those clusters, build the compartment's blocks, and upload them to its bucket.

> - **One job spans every write compartment.** A job is scoped to one partition but carries a separate

Reviewer 2: It's not strictly mandatory, right?

```suggestion
- **One job can span every write compartment.** A job is scoped to one partition but carries a separate
```

  offset range per cluster, built into a single block with the ranges merged in record-timestamp order.
  Scoping a job to a single cluster instead would produce a separate block per cluster for the same
  window, multiplying blocks and chunks by roughly the number of write compartments until compaction
  merges them away — raising object-storage cost and query load, since store-gateways then load more
  blocks per query.
- **A job is all-or-nothing across its clusters.** The block-builder reads every cluster's range
  together, and if any read fails the whole job is retried, so committed offsets never advance past
  unread data. One unhealthy write compartment therefore blocks the compartment's block building until
  it recovers — acceptable because block building is delayed (store-gateways don't need a block for

>   hours) and no worse than a single Kafka cluster being down without compartments.

Reviewer 2: I think the statement "store-gateways don't need a block for hours" is questionable, given the direction where we're heading to: reducing the time range queried from ingesters.

Author: Good point — with the time range served by ingesters shrinking, "don't need a block for hours" overstated the tolerance. Updated in 7f93837 to drop the duration claim: the failure mode is now framed as no worse than a single Kafka cluster being down without compartments, with the delay tolerance bounded by how long ingesters keep serving the not-yet-built data.
